trigger our chats afternoon welcome to
today's Downing Street press conference
and pleased to be joined today by
Professor Steven powers national medical
director of NHS England and again by Sir
Peter Hendy chair of Network Rail and
directing the restart of transport
system let me begin by updating you on
the latest information from the
government's cobra file on the first
slide here we can see the latest
information on infections results from
the ons infection survey published this
morning estimate that the number of
people who tested positive of
coronavirus in England fell from 150 mm
between the 27th of April and the 10th
of May to 33,000 between the 25th of May
and the 7th of June this is encouraging
progress and suggests that around 1 in
1700 people in the community had
coronavirus during the latest period of
the survey Sage has also confirmed today
that their estimate of the our rate for
the UK is unchanged on last week at
naught point seven to naught point nine
we want to keep the r8 number below 1
and our of course is the average number
of additional people infected by each
infected person the second slide shows
the confirmed cases with a test 6
million 430 4713 tests for coronavirus
have now been carried out or posted out
in the UK this includes one hundred and
ninety three thousand two hundred and
fifty three tests carry out carried out
or posted out yesterday two hundred and
ninety two thousand nine hundred fifty
people have tested positive an increase
of 1541 cases since yesterday the graph
shows a steadily falling number of
identified cases on a seven day rolling
average despite the increase in testing
the third slide shows the latest data
from hospitals 535 people
admitted to hospital with coronavirus in
England Wales and Northern Ireland on
the 9th of June down from 720 to a week
earlier and down from a peak of 3432 on
the 1st of April 392 coronavirus
patients are currently in mechanical
ventilation beds in the UK down from 571
a week ago and down from a peak of 3301
on the 12th of April the fourth slide
shows what is happening in hospitals
across the country there are now five
thousand six hundred and seven people in
hospital with coronavirus in the UK down
20 percent from seven thousand and
thirty six a week ago and down from a
peak of twenty thousand six hundred and
ninety seven on the 12th of April as the
graphs show while there is some
variation most nations and regions in
the UK are broadly following a similar
pattern the fifth slide shows the daily
figures for those who sadly lost their
lives after testing positive for
coronavirus across all settings the
total number of deaths now stands at 41
thousand four hundred and eighty-one
that's an increase of two hundred and
two fatalities since yesterday
we're measured by a seven-day rolling
average the daily number of deaths
currently stands at 174 down from a peak
of 943 on the 14th of April although the
number of deaths is now firmly down our
deepest sympathies go out to all those
who have lost loved ones transports is
instrumental to our recovery to connect
people with jobs to help level up
Britain and even to make us a healthier
and more active nation but as people
start to travel transport also presents
one of our biggest challenges how we
protect passengers prevent the spread
virus even as we become more mobile
transport use may be the first occasion
since the onset of kovat that we've
shared confined spaces with others so
it's critical for it critical that we
all take a vigilant and cautious
approach over the next few weeks I'm
just going to say this if you can work
from home you should continue to do so
if you cannot work from home you should
try to avoid public transport if you
must use public transport you should
travel a quieter times of day and if you
are an employer you should do everything
in your power to prevent staff from
traveling unless it's absolutely vital
and please do allow staff to travel
quieter times now from Monday it becomes
mandatory in England to wear a face
covering on public transport that
includes trains buses trams ferries and
planes a face covering does not mean a
surgical mask face coverings can be made
at home and you can find guidance to do
so on Gavin UK as we move to recovery
it's more important than ever to protect
each other
preventing those showing no symptoms
from infecting others I know there's
huge public support for compulsory face
coverings they show respect for our
fellow travelers but for clarity
transport operators will be able to
refuse permission to travel where
someone isn't using a face covering and
this weekend I'm taking powers through
the Public Health Act leading to fines
for non-compliance to will take a gentle
approach to enforcement during the first
couple of days and help will be at hand
in addition to the British Transport
Police the staff from Network Rail from
TfL Transport for London and transport
operators in the coming weeks will also
deploy journey makers to assist and
remind commuters of the need to wear
face coverings plus the safer transport
campaign
plenty of reminders bus stops and rail
stations and on social media
remembering your face covering should be
the same as picking up your phone your
wallet or your purse
whenever you're leaving the house please
read the guidance ensure you have a face
covering and protect your fellow
commuters this crisis has tested our
nation yet through adversity comes
possibility a greener transport future
within our grasp for example through the
two billion pounds investment in the
cycling and walking program the
challenge though is to make Transport
currently our biggest emitter of
greenhouse gases part of the solution
not of the problem if you take the
aviation sector for example which has
had an impossible few months yet despite
these obvious challenges there's a real
determination within the industry to
have a greener restart so we're bringing
together leaders from aviation
environmental groups and government to
form the jet zero Council this group
will be charged with making net zero
emissions possible for future flights
our goal within a generation will be to
demonstrate flight across the Atlantic
without harming the environment and
today we're backing a company called the
losses who are building a plant for
aviation biofuels in Lincolnshire I'm
also excited about it Cambridge
Cambridge University and Whittle labs
project to accelerate techno
technologies for zero carbon flight the
shared experience of fighting
coronaviruses changed us in many
different ways
it's although it's forced us apart it's
also brought us together although it's
tested us it's also shown us at our very
best and although it's made us reflect
on the past it's focused us on those
plans for the future but now as we
become more mobile we must not forget
this insidious virus is still a threat
their own that not only means avoiding
public transport if you can
it also means from Monday wearing a face
covering on public transport avoiding
gatherings of more than six people
including two protests I understand that
people want to show the passion for
issues that they care deeply about and
we must never be complacent about
stamping out racism and discrimination
in this country but please for the sake
of your health and that of your friends
and families don't attend mass
gatherings we've come a long way as we
move towards recovery let's protect
lives as well as livelihoods thank you
very much I I'm going to turn to David
from Sunderland member of the public who
has the first question
and these questions this question it's
likely that some businesses will not
survive this pandemic and therefore
unemployment will rise what specific
plans to the government have to create
jobs thank you David thank you very much
for that question and you're absolutely
right we've seen the scale of the
challenge we've seen the new and
statistics out today and we recognize
that in common with the rest of the
world we have an enormous battle on our
hands
not only with the coronavirus and the
recovery from that but also but
recovering the economy and of course
during this entire pandemic what we've
tried to do is to put our arms around
the British people to make sure that we
have those schemes including the
furlough scheme the business loans
grants to hospitality industry and very
much more besides to try to ensure that
jobs can be protected against what we
hope will be a temporary but albeit very
severe we understand a jolt to the
economy so in terms of your question
David we absolutely want to make sure
the first of all jobs aren't lost where
the businesses are just experiencing
downturns because they've been closed
these last few weeks
a months and
secondly to have a really proactive
stance towards getting this economy
going again when it is safe to do so and
it absolutely has to be stressed that
the safety is the most important part of
this people have not given up weeks of
months at home sacrificed so much in
order for us to throw that away with a
second spike but yeah we will absolutely
be coming forward with plans making sure
that we're protecting our jobs as we've
been doing throughout this and making
sure that people can get back into
employment Simon from Dorset has the
next question which i think is a written
question he says we hear a lot about
antibody testing which will tell us if
we have been exposed to the virus what
work is being done to establish if
antibodies mean less risk and infection
or possible immunity and I think I can
probably do no better than this to turn
to the professor
Thank You Thank You secretary well thank
you Simon for the question
a lot of work is being done on the
question of whether the development of
antibodies after an infection is a
marker of immunity so after any
infection particularly virus infections
the body will generate these antibodies
that act to ensure that the virus is
controlled in the first infection but
more importantly in any subsequent
exposure to the virus ensure that either
the virus doesn't take hold in the
individual or perhaps that the disease
is a lot milder the second time around I
should say that antibodies are not the
only way that the body's immune system
works there are other mechanisms for
combating viruses and there's a whole
host of science around cellular ability
so how cells respond not just antibodies
which are proteins but the important
question here is we can measure
antibodies indeed we are now measuring
antibodies so we are beginning at it
beating it getting to get a sense of how
many people have developed antibodies in
response to the virus and a very key
question is does does that antibody
response does that positive test mean
that there is immunity in the future so
it will only be time and studies over
time that really tell us the answer to
that question but those studies are
underway
for example in the health service in the
NHS public health England had launched a
study called siren and siren is
recruiting health care staff who may
have been exposed to the virus into a
study that will follow them over time to
see firstly if they develop the virus
again by the swab testing and secondly
how that correlates how that is
associated with antibody levels and the
positive antibody tests that they may
have been developed and we have been
encouraging as many staff as possible
throughout our NHS organisations to join
that study so short answer we will only
know in time but we are certainly
working on that here in the UK and it is
also being worked on internationally
Stephen thanks very much and Simon thank
you for your question I turn out to
Catherine burns from the BBC Catherine I
this question is for you and professor
powers please twice as many people have
died from corona virus across the
poorest parts of England and Wales
compared to wealthier parts of the
country how can it be that where you
live can double your chances of dying
doesn't this show that more needs to be
done to deal with health inequalities
first of all I'll have a go that
Catherine yes I agree but more always
needs to be done to deal with health
inequalities and it's something we're
very passionate about and we were
elected on the basis of so leveling up
by which we mean getting rid of the
health inequalities getting rid of the
ability for people to have opportunities
the first question about jobs and access
to jobs and productivity within
different regions I'm a northern
powerhouse Minister part of my job is to
make sure that the north were people at
work every bit as hard should have the
same productivity which is partly down
to things like transport housing and
many other things which lead into health
inequalities as well so yes I'm I think
we're all convinced these things are all
linked together and we're absolutely
dedicated to tackling them but for a
possibly a more scientific answer I'll
turn to Steve yes we absolutely should
be focusing on health inequalities more
and that's exactly what the NHS is doing
it's exactly what was in the long-term
plan that NHS England published at the
start of last year it's the
that many of the risk factors that
underlie kovat 19 so those things that
you are more likely to do badly when you
get the infection like diabetes like
obesity like heart and lung disease we
see more frequently in more deprived
areas of the country and so tackling
those issues fundamentally will also
mean that people are less likely for
infections such as kovat 19 so we have
very targeted approaches I lead the
cardiovascular programs at NHS England
and we've been putting in place very
targeted approaches in in heart disease
for example that really focus on the
most deprived areas because it is
absolutely crucial that we narrow the
gap in health inequalities question also
to you and professor power is there are
reports that the chief nursing officer
Ruth Mae is either unwilling or unable
to attend these press conferences
anymore
because she won't defend Dominic
Cummings can you please tell me if this
is true and if so do you think that is
right
well III don't think it is true and
she's attended that many times before I
notice actually that at the top of the
number 10 Twitter feed and I see one of
her tweets pinned and and so I'm
absolutely sure she's been a regular
contributor before and I'm sure should
be back here again oh I don't know
anything about the the various
discussions but all I can say is that
I've been here many times saying exactly
what I think thank you thank you very
much and thank you and Catherine for
your question
I turned to Tom Clark ITV hello States
thanks very much taking my question the
first one I think it's be you my second
question I made for professor powers
given the economic figures of carrots
they which I think can only be described
just dismal wouldn't it be sensible to
mandate the wearing of masks everywhere
not just on public transport in fact to
do any measure that might help get the
economy back on its feet that would help
prevent the further spread of the virus
and to you professor Paris and
the odd number across the UK is still
stubbornly mir-21 according to the
scientific advice that's largely to the
amount of coronavirus in hospitals and
care homes I noticed to give the most
recent public health England data for
respiratory outbreaks and hospitals
we've had the largest increase in
respiratory outbreaks since the peak in
the last week does that show that
whatever we're doing in hospitals to
prevent coronavirus spreading is not
working thanks very much Tom let's look
on the first point about I should say
face coverings for public transport not
face masks really important I know that
Peters been working on this the last few
weeks and we're very very keen I'll ask
him to say a word about that in a second
my understanding of the science and I
know that Steven will put me right if I
if I get this wrong but in terms of sort
of priority social distancing is
absolutely the most important thing
along with washing your hands and along
with not touching your face so perhaps
those things are equal Steven will tell
us we found when we looked at the
evidence on on face coverings that it
was distant to those things in the end
as you know and as I mentioned in my
comments before we've decided to bring
those in and make the mandatory because
it is something actually helps your
fellow commuter your fellow traveler and
we thought that was a good thing to do
for society by its very nature if you
are on a train or a plane or a ferry or
a bus you're in an enclosed area that's
not the case if you are out and about on
the streets and I think that may be the
principle difference of this one if I
can just use your point to ask Sir Peter
to comment on the face mask coming in
and the work that's going on there and
then I'll go to Steven on your last
point so thank you sexually stay on face
coverings when we first was restarting
the transport system when people were
first able to travel again apart from
essential workers but the government
said then that face coverings were
recommended when it might be likely that
you would be close to other other people
the reality of our trance
systems and particularly as the economy
ramps up is that there will be more and
more occasions at which you might be
closer to people than you would care for
so it seems perfectly logical to me and
all my colleagues is transport operators
to mandate face coverings now because as
we get to Monday and the restart of
non-essential retail and looking at more
people going to work it's much more
likely that you'll see I'll be close to
other people so face coverings is a
sensible thing to do and we're expecting
on Monday because passengers are hugely
sensible for people to be wearing face
coverings my understanding thanks Pedro
reminds thank you it's an enclosed space
and I think that's the the key
difference between that and walking down
street but I'm just going to just go to
the expert both from that and the are
number question statement so what's on
the face mask I think the chief medical
officer and chief scientific adviser say
number of times on this podium the
evidence is is weak but nevertheless
there is some evidence and it is it is
better for enclosed spaces than open
spaces where there is less risk of
transmission on the question of
hospitals and infection in hospitals
you're absolutely right it is very
important that we focus very hard on
infection in hospitals clearly the
hospital environment is one where there
is more infection because we are we have
been treating many many thousands of
patients with infection and clearly
infection control and stopping any
potential spread in those environments
is critical this is something that the
NHS and hospitals are well used to we've
been managing infection control for many
many years we've had great success in
things like em RSA if you go back 15
years ago that was common to see people
infected with Mrs a in the blood in
hospitals and through rigorous infection
control that's that is very much all you
know the levels are much much lower
almost eliminated so we know how to do
this so as we've learnt more about this
virus and how it spreads
for instance the potential for
asymptomatic individuals to spread we've
been working closer and closer with our
hospitals and other healthcare settings
to ensure that we have the policies the
processes in place to ensure the
we minimize the risk of spread so so if
I give you some of the examples of
what's being put in place so we have
been increasing the amount of testing
that we've been doing both our staff and
patients so quite a while ago now we
started testing all patients who were
being admitted as emergencies into
hospitals not just those with symptoms
of kovat that would allow us to spot
those people who were asymptomatic and
make sure that they were cohorted
appropriate or segregated appropriately
from other patients we started testing
staff who were obviously symptomatic and
then we started testing staff who were
asymptomatic more recently we have had a
real focus on data collection and
understanding those organizations where
we need who we need to support the most
and Bruce may the chief nursing officer
is leading on that work and only today
after the Secretary of State's
announcement last week we have asked all
hospitals and healthcare settings to
introduce the routine fairing wearing of
surgical masks and the reason for that
is when you move out of the ward areas
where PP is worn into the corridors and
spaces where sometimes it can be harder
to manage social distancing it's
important that the use of face masks is
is there to further reduce attack the
chance of transmission so we have
progressively over the course of this
epidemic introduced more and more
measures as we've learned more about
this virus to really minimize the risk
of transmission in hospital but you're
absolutely right it's something we have
to continue our focus on and ensure we
control
Tommi order coming very briefly just
quickly now but why do you think you've
seen increase in average and hospitals
in the last week so so I think as we are
moving now from a small from a community
incident so community amount of
infection that is reducing what we will
begin to see over time is more focused
on individual outbreaks and and of
course that might not just be hospitals
there might be other settings you will
know from international reports that
abbatoirs meat processing factories have
been subject to outbreaks possibly
because in a cold environment very cold
environment
virus is more stable so I think we are
now moving from a period of time where
we've had to focus on a high level of
that surge of infection in the
population through to managing more
discreet outbreaks which is again you
have heard at this podium will mean more
local interventions to manage that and
again that is something that the public
health England that local directors of
Public Health and local governments and
the NHS is used to dealing with in non-m
epidemic circumstances from time to time
we do see outbreaks of infectious
diseases and we know how to manage them
Tom thank you very much I mean it's just
worth mentioning reminding people and
saving that from Monday people should
take face coverings to hospitals if
they're going there easily as well at
all thank you let's turn now to ashes
joshi from sky ashes thank you very much
my first question is to you mr. Schatz
you were talking about the importance of
the our rates the first time today we've
had a regional breakdown so while
nationally we're still it one or just
below in the southwest we've got a range
between nought point eight to one point
one which takes us above that's all
important number the Prime Minister has
talked about so many times are we moving
now towards the very real possibility of
regional lockdown thank you my
understanding again it been wise for me
to turn to medical expertise but on the
are rate and the way that's been
published today the range as you mention
is not 0.7 to nought point nine
nationwide and we're confident that from
what we understand from Sage that it's
there for less than one those then a
band in each area they've been in cross
country but in each area where there's a
sort of high and a low estimate made
based on a number of series of different
modeling approaches taken by Sage and it
so happens that one of them as you
rightly say says it could be between 0.9
and 1.1 but it's an outlier of the I
think the central estimate to answer
your question directly we are very
interested of course to be all the more
data we can analyze them all we can see
where there are outbreaks I noticed
today we're at 193
and plus tests Donal all sent out so
we've got a large number of tests being
and produced and that gives us much
better more informative data about where
issues might bubble up in the future so
you know wouldn't want to rule anything
out but I think probably that Southwest
Figure today isn't quite as maybe being
reported but again I turn to the
expertise of Professor well yes thank
you it's exactly as the secretary state
has described so sage or its modeling
groups pi m takes data from a number of
different academic groups who do
modeling around the r number and then it
takes all those individual models which
are all slightly different they're all
using slightly different assumptions and
different models and then it produces a
consensus and when it produces that
consensus it essentially has a central
most likely projection and then a range
around it which which represents that
you can never be completely confident on
a single central projection and there is
a range what we call a confidence limit
that you might be familiar with in
statistics and and as you are as you
said sage for the first time today as
published those regional R values they
do have central projections and ranges
and the important thing is that in all
regions the central projection within
that range is below one thank you Ashley
do you want to come back businesses and
people in the southwest region today
they're quite worried about it so what
would you say to them to allay their
fears and concerns so I actually cut
Steven off you were finishing the points
as well I was going to make a further
point around that are of course is a
very important way of looking at this
but but there are other things that we
look at so you may also be aware that
the Office for National Statistics has
published again today the results from
their surveillance study where they
randomly sample individuals in the
population to directly look for how many
people are testing positive for this
virus and that study has shown that over
the last month or so or last few weeks
we have seen a steady reduction in their
projection of the
or infections in the community and
really that evidence also suggests that
the r-value is below one because it's
only when the r-value is below one that
we would see that decrease in the number
of infections so R is really important
but there are other ways to of measuring
how frequent the virus is in the
population okay and actually I'd say
look the message to somebody in the
southwest watching and this concerned
that they've seen that at least one of
the projection models and suggests
there's a range which could go above one
is please stay alert follow the advice
and stay at home that's the only week we
now know that's the only way to and
defeat this thing in the short term and
it's doubly important to do so but
across the country as well and I think
not to be over alarmed because as
Professor Steven a powerses said this
was actually outlawed at the top of the
range which had a number of others which
showed it was still below one but please
stay alert can I turn to
Natasha Clark the son transport
secretary several airlines have said
that the government hasn't spoken to
them in any detail about plans for air
bridges which would allow people to
travel to countries with low rates of
inspection without having to quarantine
it's the government currently in talks
with individual current countries for
air bridges or travel corridors which
could make that travel easier if so how
those talks progressing and have any
countries declined to work with us so
far and Stephen powers Chris which he
said earlier suite there was a
reasonable chance there will be a second
wave of the virus this winter
what extra arrangements are the NHS and
the government putting its place to
prepare for this in our hospital and
care homes and for the effect of the
potential second lockdown given how
fully prepared we were the first time
Natasha's thanks very much I mean I as
transports actually because I spend a
lot of time speaking to the whole of the
aviation sector amongst many others and
including on issues to do with things
like the quarantine which is the basis
of the reason why air bridges would be
interesting at all and first of all just
on the the quarantine I mean I think
most most most Brits understand that
we've sacrificed a lot we've stayed at
home we've you know been fighting this
virus getting the on
below 1 what we don't want to do is you
know end up sort of essentially
reinforcing it either by people coming
here Brits going abroad and coming back
so I think the idea of quarantine is the
right thing to be doing and I know that
it has broad public support but you're
absolutely right we've always said it
would come in as a a blanket thing
initially and that's what happened and
that we would look at whether it be safe
to for example open up what you call air
bridges might better be described as
travel corridors because of course you
can get here by rail and by ferries as
well and and that's something that we're
actively working on the first review of
this takes place on the 29th of June so
I'm sorry to disappoint you about which
countries we're speaking to and all the
all the rest of it we will need to wait
at the moment it is a blanket situation
but we're of course talking to airlines
who are part of the specialists working
groups on this and talking to airports
and indeed will talk to other countries
about it
but the basic principle should be that
we must make sure that we don't end up
in a second wave situation which rather
leads into your second question people
would expect us not to do that and to
take every precaution against it and we
will only open up air bridges where it
is safe to do so and there'll be more on
that at the review period which is the
29th of June and on the second point
about the second way yes so hopefully we
won't have that second wave but of
course we have to think about the
possibility and prepare for it I would
take a bit of issue that the NHS was
poorly prepared because I think the NHS
did an absolutely magnificent job
considering this was a virus that we
didn't know about until January started
coming to the UK in February March and
then we saw that huge surge in March and
April and the NHS in my view responded
magnificently in very rapidly changing
the way it worked in order to ensure
that we had the capacity both in our
general beds but also in our ITU made
for the sickest patients to ensure that
at no time was that capacity breached
and we always had the capacity in place
for patients who needed it
fortunately in other countries in other
settings we saw that wasn't the case so
I think the NHS showed just how flexible
it can be in a crisis now it's clear
that we have learnt lessons from that
it's clearly that we going forward can
take some of the learning from that in
case that we have a second phase so for
instance we work very flexibly people
staff work flexibly in ways that they
may not have done previously and that
will be possible again going forward the
Nightingale hospitals were built in case
we need them and we're actively
considering what we need to do with
those going forward to ensure that if
there is a second wave we have capacity
in place and we're also looking at you
suggesting in outpatients in our other
areas much more video consultation so
and much more remote consultation so so
different ways of working some of which
we've wanted to do in the NHS but we
have done in an accelerated fashion so
we are thinking very hard about how we
can get back to business back to normal
business in the NHS that's really
important that we are able to do all the
stuff we do normally but at the same
time make sure that although we are
working hard to make sure it doesn't
happen that if we do see an increase in
coronavirus and that in the winter that
we have the capacity in order to deal
with that as well as the normal business
of the NHS thanks Steven was anything
you wanted to come back home what do you
think would be the best measure in in
your view to replace the quarantine
system with if indeed after this review
do you decide that a different approach
needs to be taken obviously the Home
Secretary's disgust testing airports and
obviously you've mentioned averages just
now what do you personally think might
be the best replacement work well as
I've said before and the prime minister
said in homosexual said air bridges or
travel corridors are certainly a
potential way forward and that can be
supplemented by things like testing as
well although again you have to take the
scientific advice on the validity of
doing things like testing at ports
airports and other places but there's
you know clearly there are countries
that have lower level
of infection but that may be because
they've yet to go into this rather than
that they've come out of it again so we
need to be very careful and cautious we
won't throw away the good work that's
been done but we'll have very sensible
conversations and this would certainly
be limited in the first place and I'm
speaking with the airlines and aviation
sector the whole time about this in DBS
you'd actually fresh guidance just
yesterday for for aviation and for
passengers so it's an active
conversation and they'll be more on this
before very long
thank you very much Natasha I'm gonna
turn to Adam Payne from business insider
Adam good afternoon
Secretary of State's and thank you very
much I have a question about businesses
that are dealing with the impact of
Corbett 19 we learned today than the
government no longer plans full checks
on Google's coming from the EU in
January it's at this announcement and
admission that UK businesses focused on
core bid 19 are not ready to trade with
the EU without a deal at the start of
the year despite the government saying
it is prepared to do so and isn't it
also the case that this new plan only
covers goods coming into the UK meaning
businesses that are already suffering
because of core bid 19 face the prospect
of another big economic challenge in
January and a question for professor
Powis please good afternoon professor
but been reports recently of concern
within the pharmaceutical industry but
the combined strand of carbon 19 and
leaving EU without sufficient trading
arrangements could clear-cut could put
the NHS in a position where it doesn't
have enough medicine supplies is this a
possibility and if so how concerned are
you by it
thanks very much Adam look without
wanting to get back into the whole
brexit debate and we have now left the
EU at the beginning of the year we leave
the transition period at the end of the
year and it's this government's judgment
that the best possible thing we can do
for business is provide it with absolute
certainty that we will not be stretching
out or extending the transition period
in any way shape or form and that is
absolutely the case the transition
period will end at the end of this year
now what 27 countries in the EU do on
their side is their business they do is
there to represent them
as an independent coastal nation we're
here to represent the the interests of
businesses and the population in the UK
and we'll make sure that we do that and
actually I think by saying now that that
will have the border what we'll be doing
on the border in other words that will
be sensible about the way that we
introduce this makes perfect sense I
said on the brexit Operations Committee
which looks at the Cobra committee that
looks at these things all the time and
working on you know what happens with
the hauliers and what happens with the
transfer of a documentation and all the
rest of it and we're absolutely
confident that we'll have great systems
in place there's no reason not to this
country will have all the ability to do
those things but we'll do those things
on our own terms
clearly kovita as you point out has been
a massive disruption to business we've
seen what it's doing to the economy that
is why we need the certainty for
business of knowing that we are leaving
the transition period at the end of the
year and that's what we'll do and
everything else in terms of the borders
will fall into place
I'll pass over to Stephen but just
before I do I just going to comment on
the medical supplies because we the
medicine supplies we see these stories
all the time that's partly my
responsibility for things like the
freight contracts to make sure that
doesn't happen we've been challenged
probably more than anything else since
the war in this country with regard to
freight supply good supply medicine
supply and it is the case that we have
been able to pass that test and never
have a shortage of medicines with
everything that's been going on in the
International demand through kovetz I'm
absolutely confident we'll be able to do
the same through the end of the
transition period Steve yes so thank you
very much Adam so of course medicine
supply is very critical for the NHS and
for all our patients and colleagues at
Department of Health and Social Care
keep a very close eye on all those
supply chains of course with support
from the NHS and particularly the chief
pharmaceutical officers of the Four
Nations and and their teams we did a lot
of work on that in preparation for
brexit and indeed Cove it has meant that
the teams have had to do even more work
on medicines and particular medicines
that are used in critical care for
instance so I think we have a very good
understanding of those supply chains and
we're able to look ahead and see where
problems might arise and deal with them
and I should say that disruption to
medicines supply is something that
happens all the time for a whole host of
reasons there may be problems in
manufacturing plants around the world
for example it might be regulatory
actions and as the secretary State has
said we are very good at dealing with
those seeing them seeing where they
happen and putting in place alternative
arrangements so we do know how to do
this but you're absolutely right it's
something that is critical to keep a
very close eye on thanks very much
Stephen thank you Adam I'll turn now to
Gemma Mitchell nursing times intensified
already existing racial inequalities in
nursing what solid and measurable action
has been taken to ensure the NHS and
social but particularly those from and
secondly we've heard concerns that
nurses are being asked to carry out
duties beyond their level of competence
is this acceptable and what students
thank you very much Gemma we look on the
first question about making it safe for
people to work in what are sometimes by
their very nature
higher risks areas of public service
sometimes like medicine we take that
incredibly seriously it's the reason we
did that Phe or ask for that Phe report
the report at the beginning of the month
my colleague who's the equalities
minister chemi
bad anak is now in the process of
working with that report to come out
with a series of recommendations but I
can give you a sort of early sneak
preview when I say that we consider it
doubly important to make sure the people
working in some of those higher risk
environments we
coincidentally are as you described
environments that black Asian minority
and ethnic people might be working in
get additional support in terms of
testing and tracking tracing so that
we're providing all of the the great NHS
track and trace specifically to them in
practical terms that means being able to
ramp up the amounts of testing the
people in that environment guessing as
you rightly point out and
disproportionately served by people from
Bain community so that's a very first
thing probably on the second point it's
probably one for you yes so you're
absolutely right it's key during the
covert 19 that we ensure that the NHS
does everything it possibly can to
ensure that its nurses but all is
profession all the groups working within
the NHS where they are potentially a
higher risk of covert and as you know we
have begun to understand the risk
factors for that that includes ethnicity
but it also includes obesity it includes
age it includes being male that our
individual NHS organizations are able to
understand that those individuals need
additional support that we need to risk
assess individuals against the work
they're doing and where necessarily
where necessary we deploy them if that
reduces risk of course that's something
that can only be done on an individual
basis because individual circumstances
are different and individual risks are
different but we have worked with groups
outside the NHS to issue guidance
independent expert advice to health care
organisations as to how they should do
that risk assessment and the sorts of
things that they may be able to do to
support those staff I think on your
second point of ensuring that everybody
is working within their scope of
practice within their capabilities of
course that is true across all
healthcare professionals and it is the
case that people should be working in
areas in which they are competent and
feel competent and local organisations
of course with others such as health
education England are there to make sure
that that does happen Stephen thank you
very much
Jenna thank you for that and less sorry
did you want to
come back in I just have one more quick
question about student nurses the new
here is is fast approaching and student
nurses are still not sure what what that
course is what shape their courses are
going to take from September when are
they gonna get clarity around that and
it's the government making any
contingency plans possibility that
student nurses might have to extend
their courses because they haven't been
able to meet say the pandemic and
therefore not as many nurses they're
gonna be qualifying at the end as we
expect it Jemma thanks student well one
of the things that is generally true as
a result of Kove it and I think this is
a education higher education in general
which would include nurses but other
professional groups is that universities
Institute's that do that teaching are
having to rethink the way they do they
deliver teaching and you're seeing that
in universities in general and I think
you will see that in individual courses
and I know health education England who
have responsibilities in this area
working very closely with the providers
who provide training to student nurses
to think how we can most effectively
deliver that training in a kovat
environment where it will be less
possible to do the sort of face-to-face
teaching in some part of the courses
that we've traditionally done now as it
happens I think many universities many
institutions have been moving in that
direction over time and thinking about
different ways of teaching and it as
with many things co vid 19 will
accelerate that process but what's
important throughout all of this is that
that high quality education is in place
and in and it appropriately prepares
people for the workplace Jenna Thank You
Steven thank you to you and I want to
say thank you to Sir Peter as well and
just to finish off by saying when I
stood here at other times and earlier
press conferences we've been reporting
deaths in the many hundreds and
infections in the many many thousands
and we are reaching a point now where
those numbers have come down but it's
absolutely essential that we don't throw
this away it's gonna be another warm
weekend it's very very important that
people continue to follow this advice we
do not want to be going backwards or
facing a second spike and
course critically from Monday if you're
traveling on public transport which once
again we ask you to avoid but please
remember face coverings are mandatory in
England from Monday
thank you very much so that's the end of
the latest coronavirus press briefing at
Downing Street grant chaps there the
transport secretary let's just remind
you of the main points that came out of
that briefing then with mr. chaps and
from Monday as he said it will be
compulsory to wear face coverings on all
public transport in England failure to
do so may result in a fine or you being
refused to travel the transport sector
II reminded us that if you can work from
home you should but if you can't work
from home you should try to avoid public
transport mr. sharps also said the
latest UK figures on the pandemic are
encouraging and that despite the
increase in testing new positive
coronavirus cases do continue to fall
the our number remains stable between
not 0.7 or 0.9 and once again the
transport secretary told people that
they should avoid mass gatherings of
more than six people it comes as the
latest figures show another 202 people
have died after testing positive for
kovat 19 in the UK the latest death toll
now stands at 40 1481
let's go to our place book
[Music]
see the headlines as they happen and
watch BBC News live in the app and get
the full story with BBC dr. dot UK
forward slash news follow the story for
all the latest with BBC News